[Edit] Python: sets: .add() (#7260)
Codecademy/docs: content/python/concepts/sets/terms/add/add.md

---
Title: '.add()'
Description: 'Adds a single element to a set if it is not already present.'
Subjects:
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Data Science'
Tags:
  - 'Collections'
  - 'Data Structures'
  - 'Methods'
  - 'Sets'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-python-3'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

Python's **`.add()`** method for [set](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/sets) adds a single element to the set if it is not already present, maintaining the set's unique elements property. This method modifies the set in-place and ensures that duplicate elements are automatically prevented. Sets are mutable collections that only store unique, hashable elements, making `.add()` an essential method for dynamically building sets while preserving data integrity.

> ## Syntax

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Syntax of `.add()`
```

> ## Syntax of `.add()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Syntax of Python `.add()`
```

```pseudo
set.add(element)
```

**Parameters:**

- `element`: The element to be added to the set. Only one element can be added per method call. The element must be hashable (immutable types like numbers, strings, tuples, or frozensets).

**Return value:**

The `.add()` method returns `None`. It modifies the set in-place rather than returning a new set.

> **Note:** If the element is already present in the set, the operation has no effect and does not raise an error.

## Example 1: Basic Usage of Python Sets `.add()` Method

This example demonstrates the fundamental usage of the `.add()` method with a simple set of numbers:

```py
# Create a set with initial elements
numbers = {1, 2, 3}
print("Original set:", numbers)

# Add a new element to the set
numbers.add(4)
print("After adding 4:", numbers)

# Attempt to add an existing element
numbers.add(2)
print("After adding 2 again:", numbers)

# Add different data types
numbers.add("hello")
print("After adding string:", numbers)
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
Original set: {1, 2, 3}
After adding 4: {1, 2, 3, 4}
After adding 2 again: {1, 2, 3, 4}
After adding string: {1, 2, 3, 4, 'hello'}
```

> The code demonstrates that adding an existing element (2) has no effect on the set, while new elements are successfully added regardless of their data type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code demonstrates that adding an existing element (2) does not affect the set, while new elements are successfully added regardless of their data type.
```

## Example 2: Using Pythons's `.add()` in User Management System

This example shows how to use `.add()` in a practical user management scenario where there is a need to track unique user IDs:

```py
# Initialize an empty set for active users
active_users = set()

# Simulate user login events
user_logins = [101, 102, 103, 101, 104, 102, 105]

# Add users to active set as they log in
for user_id in user_logins:
  active_users.add(user_id)
  print(f"User {user_id} logged in. Active users: {active_users}")

# Check total unique active users
print(f"Total active users: {len(active_users)}")

# Add a premium user with special handling
premium_user = 999
active_users.add(premium_user)
print(f"Premium user added. Final active users: {active_users}")
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
User 101 logged in. Active users: {101}
User 102 logged in. Active users: {101, 102}
User 103 logged in. Active users: {101, 102, 103}
User 101 logged in. Active users: {101, 102, 103}

> User 104 logged in. Active users: {101, 102, 103, 104}
> User 102 logged in. Active users: {101, 102, 103, 104}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
User 104 logged in. Active users: {101, 102, 103, 103}
User 102 logged in. Active users: {101, 102, 103, 103}
```

> User 104 logged in. Active users: {101, 102, 103, 104}
> User 102 logged in. Active users: {101, 102, 103, 104}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User 104 logged in. Active users: {101, 102, 103, 103}
User 102 logged in. Active users: {101, 102, 103, 103}
```

User 105 logged in. Active users: {101, 102, 103, 104, 105}
Total active users: 5
Premium user added. Final active users: {101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 999}
```

> This demonstrates how `.add()` automatically handles duplicate user IDs, ensuring each user appears only once in the active users set.
> 
> ## Codebyte Example: Using `array.add()` in Data Processing Pipeline
> 
> This example illustrates using `.add()` in a data processing context where there is a need to collect unique tags from various sources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This demonstrates how `.add()` automatically handles duplicate user IDs, ensuring each user appears only once in the active users set.

## Codebyte Example: Using `.add()` in Data Processing Pipeline

This example illustrates using `.add()` in a data processing context where there is a need to collect unique tags from various sources:
```
